Presentation for fpm at PackagingCon (#23)
fortran-lang/talks: PackagingCon2021-fpm/main.tex

\definecolor{red}{HTML}{FF7700}
\definecolor{blue}{HTML}{004F9F}
\definecolor{green}{HTML}{2DCC35}
\definecolor{yellow}{HTML}{FBB900}

\pgfdeclareimage[width=.025\paperwidth]{logo}{Figures/logo-fortran}
\usecolortheme{MCTC}
\useoutertheme[subsection=false]{MCTC}
\useinnertheme{rounded}
\useinnertheme{rectangles}
\setbeamertemplate{page number in head/foot}[framenumber]

\title{Fortran package manager}
\subtitle{Toward a rich ecosystem of Fortran packages}
\author[Sebastian Ehlert]{\underbar{Sebastian~Ehlert},
Ondřej~Čertík,
Milan~Curcic,
Jakub~Jelínek,
Laurence~Kedward,
Vincent~Magnin,
Emanuele~Pagone,
Brad~Richardson,
John~Urban}
\institute{\includegraphics[width=.5in]{Figures/logo-fortran}}
\date{10th November, 2021\\PackagingCon}

\begin{document}

\setbeamercolor{normal text}{fg=light,bg=dark}
\begin{frame}[plain]
   \titlepage
\end{frame}
\setbeamercolor{normal text}{fg=dark,bg=light!50}

\section{Motivation}

\begin{frame}{Outline}

   \vfill
   \tableofcontents

   \vfill
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{What is Fortran?}
   \begin{itemize}

>       \item Fortran was developed by John Backus' team at IBM in 1954--1957

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item Fortran was developed by John Backus's team at IBM in 1954--1957
```

(this is a common gotcha; we omit the "s" after apostrophe only if the noun that precedes it is plural.)

      \item created to ease translation of \alert{mathematical formulas} into machine code

>       \item the first \alert{high-level}, \alert{optimized}, and \alert{cross-platform} programming language

Reviewer: I suggest moving this (3rd) bullet to the top, since it answers the question (What is Fortran?) directly.

>       \item Fortran was developed by John Backus' team at IBM in 1954--1957
>       \item created to ease translation of \alert{mathematical formulas} into machine code
>       \item the first \alert{high-level}, \alert{optimized}, and \alert{cross-platform} programming language

Author: ```suggestion
      \item the first \alert{high-level}, \alert{optimized}, and \alert{cross-platform} programming language
      \item Fortran was developed by John Backus's team at IBM in 1954--1957
      \item created to ease translation of \alert{mathematical formulas} into machine code
```

      \item highly successful in scientific computing and engineering
      \item many scientific applications and libraries are developed in Fortran
      \item language still under active development, latest standard is \alert{2018}
   \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Motivation}
   \begin{itemize}
      \item building and distributing Fortran software is difficult
         \begin{itemize}
            \item[--] manual makefiles are seldom cross platform compatible
            \item[--] autoconf is not working on native Windows
            \item[--] learning curve for CMake is incredibly steep
            \item[--] meson does not install module files automatically
         \end{itemize}
      \item writing of build files and adjustment for Fortran is time-intensive
      \item difficult and tedious to reuse Fortran source code
      \item system-wide installation dangerous for multiple Fortran compilers
         (no ABI compatibility)
      \item impossible to depend on a project without redistributing it
         \\[2ex]
      \item[\alert{▶}] create a \alert{Fortran-specific} build system and package manager to fix this

>       \item[\alert{▶}] make it easy to create \alert{reusable} Fortran libraries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item[\alert{▶}] make it easy to create and distribute \alert{reusable} Fortran libraries
```

      \item[\alert{▶}] Fortran package manager (\alert{fpm})
   \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Adoption of fpm}
   \begin{columns}
      \begin{column}{.5\textwidth}
         \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{Figures/fpm-projects.pdf}
         \vskip-2ex

         \scriptsize
         Data collected from GitHub and GitLab on 15th Sep, 2021  % TODO: Update
      \end{column}
      \hskip-1em
      \begin{column}{.55\textwidth}
         \begin{itemize}
            \item today \alert{173} open source projects are using fpm  % TODO: Update
            \item ca. \alert{160} unique developers have contributed\\ to those projects  % TODO: Update
            \item \alert{62} contributors at the fpm project
            \item code contributions from \alert{21} developers to fpm
            \item hosted on GitHub (MIT licensed):\\\alert{https://github.com/fortran-lang/fpm}
         \end{itemize}
      \end{column}
   \end{columns}

> \end{frame}

Reviewer: I think this slide came too soon. I suggest moving it to after current slide 11 (First class dependencies)

Author: I'll move it to the summary section

\begin{frame}{Specialities about Fortran}
   \begin{itemize}
      \item Fortran uses modules to share symbols between packages\\(since Fortran 90, C++20 modules are similar)
      \item implementations might be provided with submodules
      \item compilation order depends on module and submodule interdependencies
      \item modules must be available to make Fortran libraries reusable
      \item no ABI compatibility between compilers and no standardized module format
   \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\section{Implementing fpm in Fortran}

> \begin{frame}{Language choice for implementing a package manager}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\begin{frame}{Choosing the language to implement a package manager}
```

   \begin{columns}
      \hskip.5em
      \begin{column}{.46\textwidth}
         \begin{itemize}
            \item fast without much overhead

>             \item self-contained and simple to setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            \item self-contained and simple to set up
```

            \item easily accessible for users/contributors
         \end{itemize}
      \end{column}
      \begin{column}{.49\textwidth}
         \begin{itemize}

>             \item[\alert{▶}] use compiled language

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            \item[\alert{▶}] use a compiled language
```

         \begin{itemize}
            \item creates new projects with fpm layout
            \item backfilling to update existing projects
         \end{itemize}
      \end{column}
   \end{columns}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Layout of an fpm project}
   \begin{columns}
      \begin{column}{.6\textwidth}
         \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{Figures/layout.pdf}
      \end{column}
      \hskip-1em
      \begin{column}{.45\textwidth}
         \begin{itemize}
            \item package manifest in \alert{TOML}
            \item limited complexity of build file
            \item mainly meta data of project\\
               (license, author, keywords, \ldots)
               \\[2ex]
            \item default layout requires only \alert{name}\\
               (\textcolor{blue}{src}, \textcolor{blue}{app}, \textcolor{blue}{example}, and \textcolor{blue}{test})
            \item \alert{source-dir} for customizing layout
               \\[2ex]
            \item executable names from \alert{program} unit
               \\[2ex]
            \item system libraries can be linked
               \\[2ex]
         \end{itemize}
      \end{column}
   \end{columns}

> \end{frame}

Reviewer: I recommend acknowledging the inspiration from Rust's Cargo in this slide.

Author: I'm probably talking about inspiration from Cargo and Stack at the Implementation slide already.

   \end{itemize}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}{Extending fpm with plugins}
   \begin{itemize}
      \item package manifest provides space for third-party projects
      \item fpm is available as fpm package and can be used as dependency
      \item plugins are used automatically from the command-line
      \item useful for staging new features before integration in fpm
   \end{itemize}
   \vfill

   \begin{columns}
      \begin{column}{.45\textwidth}
         Searching for fpm packages: \alert{fpm-search}
         \begin{itemize}
            \item available from \textit{fpm search} command
            \item downloads the fpm registry
            \item search package names, descriptions
         \end{itemize}
      \end{column}
      \hskip1em
      \begin{column}{.45\textwidth}
         Documentation of intrinsics: \alert{fpm-man}
         \begin{itemize}
            \item available from \textit{fpm man} command
            \item access to documentation of intrinsics
            \item cross-platform, no man required
         \end{itemize}
      \end{column}
   \end{columns}
\end{frame}

\section{Summary and outlook}

> 

Reviewer: Should we have a Next steps slide? Listing some near-future milestones for people to get excited about.

Author: Fpm is a rather young project and I actually want to motivate the discussion to get them input to steer us into the future. That's why I went with the open questions rather than milestones here.
